From:

ON GROWTH AND FORM 


BY 


D'ARCY WENTWORTH THOMPSON 

1917


PREFATORY NOTE 

THIS book of mine has little need of preface, for indeed it is 
" all preface " from beginning to end. I have written it as 
an easy introduction to the study of organic Form, by methods 
which are the common-places of physical science, which are by 
no means novel in their application to natural history, but which 
nevertheless naturalists are little accustomed to employ. 

.
.
.
.



CHAPTER V 

THE FORMS OF CELLS 

Protoplasm, as we have already said, is a fluid or a semi-fluid 
substance, and we need not try to describe the particular properties 
of the colloid or jelly-like 'substances to which it is allied, or rather
the characteristics of the "colloidal state" in which it and they 
exist; we should find it no easy matter. Nor need we appeal to 
precise theoretical definitions of fluidity, lest we come into a 
debatable land. It is in the most general sense that protoplasm 
is "fluid." As Graham said (of colloid matter in general), "its 
softness partakes of fluidity, and enables the colloid to become a 
vehicle for liquid diffusion, like water itself J." When we can deal 
with protoplasm in sufficient quantity we see its particles 
move freely through it, air-bubbles and liquid droplets shew round 
or spherical within it; and we shall have much to say about other 
phenomena manifested by its own surface, which are those especially 
characteristic of liquids. It may encompass and contain solid 
bodies, and it may "secrete" solid substances within or around 
itself; and it often happens in the complex living organism that 
these solid substances, such as shell or nail or horn or feather, 
remain when the protoplasm which formed them is dead and gone. 
But the protoplasm itself is fluid or semi-fluid, and permits of free 
(though not necessarily rapid) diffusion and easy convection of 
particles within itself, which simple fact is of elementary importance 
in connection with form, throwing light on what seem to be common 
characteristics and pecularities of the forms of living things. 

Much has been done, and more said, about the nature of protoplasm since 
this book was written. Calling cytoplasm the cell-protoplasm after deduction 
of chloroplasts and other gross inclusions, we find it to contain fats, proteins, 
lecithin and some other substances combined with much water (up to 
97 per cent.) to form a sort of watery gel. The microscopic structures 
attributed to it, alveolar, granular or fibrillar, are inconstant or invalid; 
but it does appear to possess an invisible or submicroscopic structure, 
distinguishing it from an ordinary colloid gel, and forming a quasi-solid 
framework or reticulum. This framework is based on proteid macromolecules, 
in the form of polypeptide chains, of great length and carrying in side-chains 
other organic constituents of the cytoplasm. The polymerised units 
represent the micellae which the genius of Nageli predicted or postulated 
more than sixty years ago; and we may speak of a "micellar framework" 
as representing in our cytoplasm the dispersed phase of an ordinary colloid. 
In short, as the cytoplasm is neither true fluid not true solid, neither is it true 
colloid in the ordinary sense. Its micellar structure gives it a certain rigidity 
or tendency to retain its shape, a certain plasticity and tensile strength, a 
certain ductility or capacity to be drawn out in threads; but yet leaves it 
with a permeability (or semi-permeability), a capacity to swell by imbibition, 
above all an ability to stream and flow, which justify our calling it "fluid 
or semi-fluid," and account for its exhibition of surface-tension and other 
capillary phenomena. 

The older naturalists, in discussing the differences between organic and 
inorganic bodies, laid stress upon the circumstance that the latter grow by 
"agglutination," and the former by what they termed "intussusception." 
The contrast is true; but it applies rather to solid or crystalline bodies as 
compared with colloids of all kinds, whether living or dead. But it so happens 
that the great majority of colloids are of organic origin; and out of them our 
bodies, and our food, and the very clothes we wear, are almost wholly made. 

A crystal "grows" by deposition of new molecules, one by one 
and layer by layer, each one superimposed on the solid substratum 
already formed. Each particle would seem to be influenced only 
by the particles in its immediate neighbourhood, and to be in 
a state of freedom and independence from the influence, either 
direct or indirect, of its remoter neighbours. So Lavoisier was 
the first to say. And as Kelvin and others later on explained 
the formation and the resulting forms of crystals, so wo beheve 
that each added particle takes up its position in relation to its 
immediate neighbours already arranged, in the holes and corners 
that their arrangement leaves, and in closest contact with the 
greatest number; hence we may repeat or imitate this process of 
arrangement, with great or apparently even with precise accuracy 
(in the case of the simpler crystalhne systems), by piling up spherical 
pills or grains of shot. In so doing, we must have regard to the 
fact that each particle must drop into the place where it can go 
most easily, or where no easier place offers. In more technical 
language, each particle is free to take up, and does take up, its 
position of least potential energy relative to those already there: 
in other words, for each particle motion is induced until the energy 
of the system is so distributed that no tendency or resultant force 
remains to move it more. This has been shewn to lead to the 
production of plane surfaces (in all cases where, by the hmitation 
of material, surfaces must occur); where we have planes, there 
straight edges and solid angles must obviously occur also, and, if 
equihbrium is to follow, must occur symmetrically. Our pihng up 
of shot to make mimic crystals gives us visible demonstration that 
the result is actually to obtain, as in the natural crystal, plane 
surfaces and sharp angles symmetrically disposed. 

But the living cell grows in a totally different way, very much 
as a piece of glue swells up in water, by "imbibition," or by inter- 
penetration into and throughout its entire substance. The semi- 
fluid colloid mass takes up water, partly to combine chemically 
with its individual molecules; partly by physical diffusion into 
the interstices between molecules or micellae, and partly, as it would 
seem, in other ways; so that the entire phenomenon is a complex 
and even an obscure one. But, so far as we are concerned, the 
net result is very simple. For the equilibrium, or tendency to 
equilibrium, of fluid pressure in all parts of its interior while the 
process of imbibition is going on, the constant rearrangement of its 
fluid mass, the contrast in short with the crystalhne method of 
growth where each particle comes to rest to move (relatively to the 
whole) no more, lead the mass of jelly to swell up very much as a 
bladder into which we blow air, and so, by a graded and harmonious 
distribution of forces, to assume everywhere a rounded and more 
or less bubble-like external form. So, when the same school of 
older naturalists called attention to a new distinction or contrast of 
form between organic and inorganic objects, in that the contours 
of the former tended to roundness and curvature, and those of the 
latter to be bounded by straight lines, planes and sharp angles, we 
see that this contrast was not a new and different one, but only 
another aspect of their former statement, and an immediate con- 
sequence of the difference between the processes of agglutination 
and intussusception. 

So far then as growth goes on undisturbed by pressure or other 
external force, the fluidity of the protoplasm, its mobility internal 
and external, and the way in which particles move freely hither 
and thither within, all manifestly tend to the production of swelling, 
rounded surfaces, and to their great predominance over plane sur- 
faces in the contours of the organism. These rounded contours 
will tend to be preserved for a while, in the case of naked protoplasm 
by its viscosity, and in presence of a cell-wall by its very lack of 
fluidity. In a general way, the presence of curved boundary 
surfaces will be especially obvious in the unicellular organisms, and 
generally in the external form of all organisms, and wherever 
mutual pressure between adjacent cells, or other adjacent parts, 
has not come into play to flatten the rounded surfaces into planes. 

The swelling of any object, organic or inorganic, living or dead, is bound to 
be influenced by any lack of structural symmetry or homogeneity. We 
may take it that all elongated structures, such as hairs, fibres of silk or cotton, 
fibrillae of tendon and connective tissue, have by virtue of their elongation 
an invisible as well as a visible polarity. Moreover, the ultimate fibrils are 
apt to be invested by a protein different from the "collagen" within, and 
liable to swell more or to swell less. In ordinary tendons there is a "reticular 
sheath," which swells less, and is apt to burst under pressure from within; 
it breaks into short lengths, and when the strain is relieved these roll back, 
and form the familiar annuli. Another instance is the tendency to swell of 
the "macro- molecules" of many polymerised organic bodies, proteins among 
them. 

But the rounded contours which are assumed and exhibited by 
a piece of hard glue when we throw it into water and see it expand 
as it sucks the water up, are not near so regular nor so beautiful as 
are those which appear when we blow a bubble, or form a drop, or 
even pour water into an elastic bag. For these curving contours 
depend upon the properties of the bag itself, of the film or membrane 
which contains the mobile gas, or which contains or bounds the 
mobile liquid mass. And hereby, in the case of the fluid or semifluid 
mass, we are introduced to the subject of surface-tension: of which 
indeed we have spoken in the preceding chapter, but which we must 
now examine with greater care. 

Among the forces which determine the forms of cells, whether 
they be solitary or arranged in contact with one another, this force 
of surface-tension is certainly of great, and is probably of paramount, 
importance. But while we shall try to separate out the phenomena 
which are directly due to it, we must not forget that, in each 
particular case, the actual conformation which we study may be, 
and usually is, the more or less complex resultant of surface-tension 
acting together with gravity, mechanical pressure, osmosis, or other 
physical forces. The peculiar beauty of a soap-bubble, solitary or 
in collocation, depends on the absence (to all intents and purposes) 
of these alien forces from the field; hence Plateau spoke of the films 
which were the subject of his experiments as "lames fluides sans 
pesanteur.'' The resulting form is in such a case so pure, and simple 
that we come to look on it as wellnigh a mathematical abstraction. 

Surface-tension, then, is that force by which we explain the form 
of a drop or of a bubble, of the surfaces external and internal of 
a "froth" or collocation of bubbles, and of many other things of 
like nature and in like circumstances. It is a property of liquids 
(in the sense at least with which our subject is concerned), and it 
is manifested at or very near the surface, where the liquid comes 
into contact with another liquid, a solid or a gas. We note here 
that the term surface is to be interpreted in a wide sense; for 
wherever we have solid particles embedded in a fluid, wherever we 
have a non-homogeneous fluid or semi-fluid, or a "two-phase colloid " 
such as a particle of protoplasm, wherever we have the presence of 
"impurities" as in a mass of molten metal, there we have always 
to bear in mind the existence of surfaces and of surface-phenomena, 
not only on the exterior of the mass but also throughout its inter- 
stices, wherever like and unlike meet. 

A liquid in the mass is devoid of structure; it is homogeneous, and 
without direction or polarity. But the very concept of surface- 
tension forbids this to be true of the surface-layer of a body of liquid, 
or of the "interphase" between two liquids, or of any film, bubble, 
drop, or capillary jet or stream. In all these cases, and more empha- 
tically in the case of a "monolayer," even the liquid has a structure 
of its own; and we are reminded once again of how largely the living 
organism, whether high or low, is composed of colloid matter in 
precisely such forms and structural conditions. 

Surface-tension is due to molecular force: to force, that is to say, 
arising from the action of one molecule upon another; and since 
we can only ascribe a small "sphere of action" to each several 
molecule, this force is manifested only within a narrow range. 
Within the interior of the liquid mass we imagine that such molecular 
interactions negative one another; but at and near the free surface, 
within a layer or film approximately equal to the range of the 
molecular force - or to the radius of the aforesaid " sphere of action " 
- there is a lack of equilibrium and a consequent manifestation of 
force. 

The action of the molecular forces has been variously explained. 
But one simple explanation (or mode of statement) is that the 
molecules of the surface-layer are being constantly attracted into 
the interior by such as are just a little more deeply situated; the 
surface shrinks as molecules keep quitting it for the interior, and 
this surface-shrinkage exhibits itself as a surface-tension. The process 
continues till it can go no farther, that is to say until the surface 
itself becomes a "minimal area." This is a sufficient description 
of the phenomenon in cases where a portion of liquid is subject to 
no other than its own molecular forces, and (since the sphere has, 
of all solids, the least surface for a given volume) it accounts for 
the spherical form of the raindrop, of the grain of shot, or of the 
living cell in innumerable simple organisms. 